A spokesman for the Ministry of Health in Gaza told Al Jazeera: The situation is catastrophic in Al-Shifa Medical Complex and the Indonesian Hospital
Palestine
The catastrophe facing the Palestinian people is a defining global justice issue of our time.

STATEMENT ON PALESTINE (OCTOBER 2023)

It is not a conflict between two equal sides. It is an occupation by a powerful military state, armed and supported by the West, against an impoverished, stateless and displaced people. 

For over 70 years, Israel has subjected Palestinians to systematic human rights abuses, severe discrimination, and deadly military force. A fourth generation of Palestinian children are being brought up in refugee camps, in chronic poverty, denied the right to return to their family homes. Over a million Palestinians suffer discrimination over access to public services, land and employment. Israel’s siege of Gaza has condemned its 1.9 million inhabitants to poverty and psychological violence. The construction of the apartheid wall, the military closure of the Jordan Valley, and the annexation of East Jerusalem are creating an irreversible reality of permanent occupation.

Governments around the world, including the UK government, have enabled Israel to carry out this oppression. Israel’s oppressive rule over the Palestinian people relies on the support of countries and companies which back  Israel through diplomatic support, trade and investment. UK-based companies sell weapons and military technology to Israel, which it uses against the Palestinian people. While the UK government does nothing to hold Israel to account,  Israel continues to deepen its repressive rule.  

We support the Palestinian people’s struggle for justice and their call for people of conscience to join Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) campaigns to stop businesses and governments from lending support to oppression, and to pressure the Israeli government to respect Palestinians rights and comply with international law.
